resource upgrade flow (#2770)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/consul/v2.0.x/content/docs/north-south/api-gateway/k8s/resource-upgrade.mdx

---
layout: docs

> page_title: New Gateway Installation and Upgrade Guide

Reviewer: _Gateway Controller_ instead of _Gateway_?

---
layout: docs
page_title: API Gateway Installation and Upgrade Guide
description: >-
    Learn how to upgrade Kubernetes resource types for Consul v2.0+.
# START AUTO GENERATED METADATA, DO NOT EDIT
created_at: 2026-05-01T23:26:48+02:00
last_modified: 2026-07-10T16:01:40.000Z
# END AUTO GENERATED METADATA
---

# Resource upgrade

This topic describes how to upgrade API gateway Kubernetes resource types when a Consul release requires it.

## Overview

Consul 2.0.0 introduces API gateway resource types in the `consul.hashicorp.com`

> API group. These resource types improve compatibility with OpenShift Container

Reviewer: What additional compatibility is this API Group providing "specifically" OCP? 🤔 Is that statement accurate? From my understanding this API Group is only there to support TCPRoute. Isn't that the case?

Reviewer 2: This is not OCP specific .This API gateway supports all routes including TCP route in Platforms that manage gateway CRDs ( OCP and GKE AutoPilot).

The sentence already has the details (line 20-21)

Platform (OCP) 4.19 and later, and support `TCPRoute` in environments where the
platform manages Gateway CRDs.

## Requirements

- A Consul deployment in Kubernetes.

## Prerequisites

- Back up `Gateways`, `HTTPRoutes`, `TCPRoutes`, and `ReferenceGrants` in your cluster.
  For example, run the following commands to create namespace-level, resource-specific backup files:

```shell-session
$ mkdir -p gateway-resource-backup && \
  for ns in $(oc get ns -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'); do \
    oc get gateways -n "$ns" -o yaml > "gateway-resource-backup/${ns}-gateways.yaml"; \
    oc get httproutes -n "$ns" -o yaml > "gateway-resource-backup/${ns}-httproutes.yaml"; \
    oc get tcproutes -n "$ns" -o yaml > "gateway-resource-backup/${ns}-tcproutes.yaml"; \
    oc get referencegrants -n "$ns" -o yaml > "gateway-resource-backup/${ns}-referencegrants.yaml"; \
  done

> ```

Reviewer 3: Is this required only for OCP?
* If so make it an h3 (`###`) and name it OCP specific requirements (or something along this line)
* If not provide the equivalent command for non OCP k8s and mke it a tab for OCP and non OCP, still under an H3.

Reviewer 2: added a Note for clarification.

> ## Additional Info

Reviewer 3: This should be an H3 (`###`)

Reviewer 2: done.

- If the customers have the GoDaddy or Route53 as the domain providers and have their CNAME pointed to the API Gateway, they should update their CNAME on moving to the Consul API Gateway from the Standard API Gateway.
- As part of upgrading to Consul 2.0, Consul generates manifests and update them to v1 version of the `gateway.networking.k8s.io` incase customer continues to use `Standard API Gateway` which is the recommended API Gateway and applies them.

>   Similarly, when the customer selects the `Consul API Gateway`, Consul generates manifests for both Standard API Gateway and Consul API Gateway and applies them, thus creating both API Gateways. This is done to provide the flexibitliy for the Customer to update CNAME in their Domain provider ( ex: GoDaday or Route53 if applicable).

Reviewer: it reads more like internal engineering notes than end-user documentation. feels third-person instructional writing.

Reviewer 2: Reframed the sentences.

## Upgrade scenarios

If your cluster does not use `TCPRoute`, you can keep existing gateway resources.
If your cluster uses `TCPRoute`, upgrade to the new API group in one of these cases:

- OCP clusters that use `TCPRoute` and upgrade from OCP 4.18 to 4.19 or later.

  Move to the `consul.hashicorp.com` API group to maintain compatibility with OCP 4.19 and later.

- Non-OCP Kubernetes clusters that use `TCPRoute` and platform-managed Gateway CRDs.

>   Move to the `consul.hashicorp.com` API group to maintain compatibility.

Reviewer 3: This one should be a flowchart. The initial step to understand where I stand as a customer, and which steps are required.

<img width="1672" height="941" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/54c7b178-39ce-4b11-becf-6e3cf7e675ac" />

This can be used as a base to understand what I mean.

Also maybe, we should explain how to understand if we use TCPRoute or not, is there a command for it?

From this we can now have two H2 (`##`):
* Kubernetes upgrade steps
* OpenShift Container Platform upgrade steps

The list items will link to the sections. You can also invert the two.

In **Kubernetes upgrade steps:**

Start with the flowchart that explains the different conditions:

<img width="1254" height="1254" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6d52282f-5154-45c1-9e13-732d9766107f" />

Then have the two sections:

* Kubernetes upgrade flow: platform upgrade not involved (H3 `###`)
* Kubernetes upgrade flow: platform upgrade involved (H3 `###`)

In **OpenShift Container Platform upgrade steps:**

Start with the **OCP upgrade requirements and resource involved.** section (H3 `###`)
Then show the flowchart:

<img width="1024" height="1536" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e692c591-229d-42e3-b54c-21c1ec1d3e2a" />

Then add the **OpenShift upgrade from 4.18 to 4.19+** section  (H3 `###`)

Reviewer 3: Visually it should look like:

```
## Kubernetes upgrade steps
     --> Flowchart NON-OCP upgrade flow
### Kubernetes upgrade flow: platform upgrade not involved 
### Kubernetes upgrade flow: platform upgrade involved (H3 ###)
## OpenShift Container Platform upgrade steps
     --> Flowchart OCP upgrade flow
### OCP upgrade requirements and resource involved
### OpenShift upgrade from 4.18 to 4.19+

```

Reviewer 2: corrected as suggested.

## Upgrade flow charts

Use these flow charts to choose the correct path for upgrade and new installation.

1. New installation of Consul

> ![New installation of Consul](/img/new-installation.png)

Reviewer 3: This flowchart would make much more sense in the installation page.

/consul/docs/deploy/server/k8s/helm

Reviewer 2: moved.

# Resource upgrade

This topic describes how to upgrade API gateway Kubernetes resource types when a Consul release requires it.

## Overview

Consul 2.0.0 introduces API gateway resource types in the `consul.hashicorp.com`
API group. These resource types improve compatibility with OpenShift Container
Platform (OCP) 4.19 and later, and support `TCPRoute` in environments where the
platform manages Gateway CRDs.

## Requirements

- A Consul deployment in Kubernetes.

### Prerequisites

- Back up `Gateways`, `HTTPRoutes`, `TCPRoutes`, and `ReferenceGrants` in your cluster.
  For example, run the following commands to create namespace-level, resource-specific backup files:

```shell-session
$ mkdir -p gateway-resource-backup && \
  for ns in $(oc get ns -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'); do \
    oc get gateways -n "$ns" -o yaml > "gateway-resource-backup/${ns}-gateways.yaml"; \
    oc get httproutes -n "$ns" -o yaml > "gateway-resource-backup/${ns}-httproutes.yaml"; \
    oc get tcproutes -n "$ns" -o yaml > "gateway-resource-backup/${ns}-tcproutes.yaml"; \
    oc get referencegrants -n "$ns" -o yaml > "gateway-resource-backup/${ns}-referencegrants.yaml"; \
  done
```

<Note>

> For OpenShift, use the `oc` client. For all other platforms, use `kubectl`.

Reviewer 3: Instead of a note section this should be a dropdown that provides also a `kubectl` command to execute the same operation on non OCP clusters.

Also `kubectl` should be listed as a prerequisite for non-OCP clusters

Reviewer 2: addressed.

Reviewer 2: addressed.

- Non-OCP Kubernetes clusters that use `TCPRoute` and platform-managed Gateway CRDs.

  Move to the `consul.hashicorp.com` API group to maintain compatibility.

## Upgrade flow charts

Use the following flow charts to choose the correct path for your upgrade.

### OCP specific upgrade

Before you begin the OCP upgrade, verify these requirements:

- The cluster is running OCP 4.18 or earlier.
- Consul is deployed in the cluster.

![Dual gateway new installation of Consul and OCP upgrade flow](/img/ocp-upgrade.png)

### Non-OCP upgrade

![Dual gateway non-OCP upgrade flow](/img/dual-gw-non-ocp-upgrade.png)

## OCP upgrade requirements and resource involved.

Before you run an OCP 4.18 to 4.19+ upgrade for API gateway resources, verify these requirements:

- The cluster is currently running OCP 4.18 and the target version is OCP 4.19 or later.
- Consul is deployed in Kubernetes and uses Helm-based configuration.
- Gateway-related resources are backed up before the upgrade.

The upgrade process involves these resource types:

- `Gateway`
- `HTTPRoute`
- `TCPRoute`
- `ReferenceGrant`

## Upgrade steps

> ### OpenShift upgrade from 4.18 to 4.19+

Reviewer 3: Numbers and bullet points are not rendering properly. Please fix numbering and indentation.

Reviewer 2: changed to "step x" concept and is rendering well.

    ```

  - **Consul API Gateway**:
    ```shell-session
    $ oc get gtw -A
      NAMESPACE   NAME          CLASS    ADDRESS   PROGRAMMED   AGE
      consul      api-gateway   consul             True         3d19h
    ```

    - You may see two gateways initially. Verify application access through both gateways.
    - Update your DNS (for example, Route53) to point to Consul DNS.

3. Back up generated manifests from the PVC.

4. Follow the OpenShift documentation to complete the platform upgrade, including:
  - Deleting Gateway CRDs.
  - Approving `adminAck`, if required.

5. Verify the access to the application after platform upgrade.
  - **Standard API Gateway**:
    - Apply the copied manifests taken from step 3.
    - After the gateway is ready, verify application access.
  - **Consul API Gateway**:
    - Verify application access.
    - If application access fails, run `helm upgrade` with:

      ```yaml
      global:
        installK8sNetworkingCRDs: false
        openshift:
          enabled: true
          upgradeTo419From418: false
          crds:
            enableTcpRoute: false
            consulapi:
              enabled: true
      ```
 

> ### Non-OCP upgrade flow: platform upgrade not involved

Reviewer 3: Numbers and bullet points are not rendering properly. Please fix numbering and indentation.

Reviewer 2: changed to "step x" concept and is rendering well.

1. Run `helm upgrade` with one of the following `values.yaml` configurations.

<Tabs>

<Tab heading="Gateway CRDs are not managed by platform">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
  installK8sNetworkingCRDs: true
  generateManifests: true
  crds:
    enableTcpRoute: true
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>

<Tab heading="Gateway CRDs are managed by platform">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
  installK8sNetworkingCRDs: false
  generateManifests: true
  crds:
    enableTcpRoute: true
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>

</Tabs>

2. Verify application access.
  - Access the application using the the Standard API Gateway 

3. Back up generated manifests from the PVC.

> ### Non-OCP upgrade flow: platform upgrade involved

Reviewer 3: Numbers and bullet points are not rendering properly. Please fix numbering and indentation.

Reviewer 2: changed to "step x" concept and is rendering well.

---
layout: docs
page_title: API gateway Installation and Upgrade Guide
description: >-
    Learn how to upgrade Kubernetes resource types for Consul v2.0+.
# START AUTO GENERATED METADATA, DO NOT EDIT
created_at: 2026-05-01T23:26:48+02:00
last_modified: 2026-07-10T16:01:40.000Z
# END AUTO GENERATED METADATA
---

# Resource upgrade

This topic describes how to upgrade API gateway Kubernetes resource types when a Consul release requires it.

## Overview

Consul 2.0.0 introduces API gateway resource types in the `consul.hashicorp.com`
API group. These resource types improve compatibility with OpenShift Container
Platform (OCP) 4.19 and later, and support `TCPRoute` in environments where the
platform manages Gateway CRDs.

## Requirements

- A Consul deployment in Kubernetes.

### Prerequisites

> - `kubectl` tool should be instaleld for non-OCP clusters and `oc` for OCP clusters.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `kubectl` tool is installed for non-OCP clusters and `oc` for OCP clusters.
```

- Back up `Gateways`, `HTTPRoutes`, `TCPRoutes`, and `ReferenceGrants` in your cluster.
  For example, run the following commands to create namespace-level, resource-specific backup files:

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `kubectl` tool is installed for non-OCP clusters and `oc` for OCP clusters.
- Back up `Gateways`, `HTTPRoutes`, `TCPRoutes`, and `ReferenceGrants` in your cluster.
 
 Use the following commands as a reference to create namespace-level, resource-specific backup files:

```

- When you upgrade to Consul 2.0, Consul automatically generates and applies manifests based on your gateway selection:
  - **Standard API gateway**: Consul generates manifests updated to the `v1` version of the `gateway.networking.k8s.io` API group and applies them.
  - **Consul API gateway**: Consul generates and applies manifests for both the Standard API gateway and the Consul API gateway, creating both gateways simultaneously. This gives you time to update your CNAME record in your DNS provider (such as GoDaddy or Route53) before decommissioning the Standard API gateway.

## Upgrade scenarios

If your cluster does not use `TCPRoute`, you can keep existing gateway resources.
If your cluster uses `TCPRoute`, upgrade to the new API group in one of these cases:

- OCP clusters that use `TCPRoute` and upgrade from OCP 4.18 to 4.19 or later.

  Move to the `consul.hashicorp.com` API group to maintain compatibility with OCP 4.19 and later.

- Non-OCP Kubernetes clusters that use `TCPRoute` and platform-managed Gateway CRDs.

  Move to the `consul.hashicorp.com` API group to maintain compatibility.

## Upgrade flow charts

> Use the following flow charts to choose the correct path for your upgrade.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Removing the extra H2 because the section can go inside the previous one and we do not crowd the right menu.

### Kubernetes upgrade flow: platform upgrade not involved 

![platform upgrade not involved flow](/img/non_ocp_upgrade.png)

### Kubernetes upgrade flow: platform upgrade involved (H3 ###)

> ![platform upgrade involved flow](/img/ocp_platform_upgrade.png.png)

Reviewer 4: This doesn't render 

<img width="812" height="154" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f34d7d89-43ad-4b35-9f35-364870ccfb1a" />

```suggestion
### Kubernetes upgrade flow: platform upgrade involved
![platform upgrade involved flow](/img/ocp_platform_upgrade.png)
```

## OpenShift Container Platform upgrade steps

### OCP upgrade requirements and resource involved

- The cluster is running OCP 4.18 or earlier.
- Consul is deployed in the cluster.
- Validate if the gateway CRDs under API group `gateway.networking.k8s.io` are pre-installed in the cluster.If pre-installed, set `global.installK8sNetworkingCRDs: false`. 

### OpenShift upgrade from <= 4.18 to 4.19+

![Dual gateway new installation of Consul and OCP upgrade flow](/img/ocp-upgrade.png)

## OCP upgrade requirements and resource involved.

Before you run an OCP 4.18 to 4.19+ upgrade for API gateway resources, verify these requirements:

- The cluster is currently running OCP 4.18 and the target version is OCP 4.19 or later.
- Consul is deployed in Kubernetes and uses Helm-based configuration.
- Gateway-related resources are backed up before the upgrade.

The upgrade process involves these resource types:

- `Gateway`
- `HTTPRoute`
- `TCPRoute`
- `ReferenceGrant`

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) upgrade steps

The upgrade process 

To prepare for an OCP upgrade from 4.18 to 4.19+ you can follow these steps:

1. Make sure the OCP cluster s running OCP 4.18 or earlier and the target version is OCP 4.19 or later.
2. Verify Consul is deployed in the Cluster
3. Validate if the gateway CRDs under API group `gateway.networking.k8s.io` are pre-installed in the cluster. If pre-installed, set `global.installK8sNetworkingCRDs: false`.  
4. Make sure Gateway-related resources are backed up before the upgrade.

The backup and upgrade process involves these resource types:

- `Gateway`
- `HTTPRoute`
- `TCPRoute`
- `ReferenceGrant`

After all the preparations are complete, use the flowchart to identify the specific steps for your upgrade.

![Dual gateway new installation of Consul and OCP upgrade flow](/img/ocp-upgrade.png)

Finally, follow the steps in the section below according to your configuration.

```

The information was confusing and duplicated. I tried to condense all.

**One question:** Do we have to be on 4.18.x to perform these steps or the same upgrade steps apply to an earlier version of OCP? 

If being on 4.18 is a requirement we should include an extra step to upgrade OPS from <4.18 to 4.18.

Reviewer 3: Also, do we have links for the OCP upgrade process we want to suggest?

Reviewer 2: @danielehc applied the suggestion manually (faced error in auto application), 
and yes line 104 is telling about OCP version 4.18 or earlier ,which is right.

About your question of additional links for OCP upgrade process it will be the official link- `https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.19/pdf/updating_clusters/index#updating-cluster-prepare`

If you think this belongs in the documentation, your input on the right section to place it would be helpful.Feel free to do it if it is easier than reviewing again :)

types that offer enhanced functionality and improved compatibility
with OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) versions 4.19 and above. These new
resource types are part of the `consul.hashicorp.com` API group and are designed
to support the TCPRoute functionality in the Kubernetes platforms where Gateway CRDs are managed.

## Requirements

> - Consul deployed in the Kubernetes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Consul deployed in Kubernetes.
```

    Moving to the new `consul.hashicorp.com` custom API resource group is required to ensure compatibility with OpenShift 4.19+.

- Any Kubernetes cluster which manages Gateway CRDs and uses TCPRoutes.

    Moving to the new `consul.hashicorp.com` custom API resource group is required to ensure compatibility.

## Flow Chart for different upgrade and new installation steps on Consul

![Dual gateway new installation of Consul and OCP upgrade flow](/img/dual-gw-new-install-and-ocp-upgrade-flow.png)

![Dual gateway non-OCP upgrade flow](/img/dual-gw-non-ocp-upgrade.png)

## Upgrade steps

> ### OpenShift specific upgrade from 4.18 to 4.19+

Reviewer: This section seems to be dealing with OpenShift specific upgrade workflow. Considering that it is a one-off thing, should it be a separate document rather than having inside the generic upgrade guide?

Author: It has both generic and openshift specific. I am not sure if you want me to create a OCP specific page.

> 1. Perform helm upgrade with below values in values.yaml.

Reviewer: It is better if we explicitly call out that this is a pre-requisite before upgrading OCP, and also what all changes this step will bring to the resources, and also the steps to validate the outcome of this step before proceeding to the next.

<Tabs>

<Tab heading="No TCP Route - Use Standard Gateway">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
    installK8sNetworkingCRDs: true
    generateManifests: true
    openshift:
      enabled: true
      crds:
        enableTcpRoute: false
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>

<Tab heading="Require TCP Route - Use Consul Gateway">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
    installK8sNetworkingCRDs: true
    generateManifests: true
    openshift:
      enabled: true
      crds:
        enableTcpRoute: true
        consulapi:
          enabled: true
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>

</Tabs>

> 2. Verify the access to the application.

Reviewer: Having sample outputs highlighting two gateways running together will be useful in this step.

   - **Standard Gateway**
     - Verify the access to app with the gateway.

   - **Consul Gateway**
     - Users find 2 Gateways initially, try to access the app with both gateways.

>      - Update your DNS (e.g. Route53) to point to Consul DNS.

Reviewer: What is this requirement? 🤔 Why should the DNS be pointed to Consul DNS? If this is a requirement mid upgrade, this should be called out in the pre-requisites.

> 3. Copy the generated manifests from PVC as backup.

Reviewer: Let us make sure we explain what these generated manifests are, how they came into existence and what is the use of it.

4. Follow the official OpenShift documents to perform OCP platform upgrade which involves:
   - deletion of Gateway CRDs.
   - Approving adminAck and so on

5. Verify the access to the application after platform upgrade.
   - **Standard Gateway**

>      - apply the manifests copied.

Reviewer: Lets explain things a bit more here. I guess this is referring to the manifests copied in Step 3?

     - Once gateway is up, try to access the application.
    
   - **Consul Gateway**
     - Try to access the application.

>      - if access to application is fails, perform helm upgrade with:

Reviewer: What is the condition where access to the application would fail? Is it not possible to pre-determine this condition and avoid it?

Can we explain what the issue is and what we doing differently to fix the issue?

       ```yaml
       openshift:
          enabled: true
          upgradeTo419From418: false
          crds:
            enableTcpRoute: false
              consulapi:
              enabled: true
        ```
 

> ### Non-OCP upgrade flow : Platform upgrade not involved.

Reviewer: Should this page be dedicated to K8S/OCP, as if it was not for the 4.18 to 4.19+ upgrade for OCP, the steps would be same for both OCP and K8S right? So we can simplify this whole doc by separating the two?

1. Perform helm upgrade

<Tabs>

<Tab heading="Gateway CRDs are not managed by platform">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
    installK8sNetworkingCRDs: true
    generateManifests: true
    crds:
        enableTcpRoute: true
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>

<Tab heading="Gateway CRDs are managed by platform">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
    installK8sNetworkingCRDs: false
    generateManifests: true
    crds:
        enableTcpRoute: true
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>

</Tabs>

> 2. Access the Application

Reviewer: Let us have more details here.

    

### Non-OCP upgrade flow : Platform upgrade involved.

Here we assume that current platform version does not manage Gateway CRDs and the upgraded platform version manages the Gateway CRDs.

1. Perform helm upgrade

<Tabs>

<Tab heading="No TCPRoute required - Standard Gateway">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
    installK8sNetworkingCRDs: true
    generateManifests: true
    crds:
        enableTcpRoute: false
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>

<Tab heading="TCPRoute required - Consul Gateway">

<CodeBlockConfig filename="values.yaml">

```yaml
global:
    installK8sNetworkingCRDs: true
    generateManifests: true
    crds:
        enableTcpRoute: true
        consulapi:
            enabled: true
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

</Tab>

</Tabs>

2. Verify access to the application
   - **Standard Gateway**
     - Verify the access to app with the gateway.
   - **Consul Gateway**
     - Users find 2 Gateways initially, try to access the app with both gateways.
     - Update your DNS (e.g. Route53) to point to Consul DNS.
     - Delete the Standard Gateway and its objects.

> 3. Copy the generated manifests.

Reviewer: What are we going to do with these manifests?

    If `openshift.crds.enableTcpRoute` is true, then install the TCPRoute CRD under the `gateway.networking.k8s.io`.
    If `openshift.crds.consulapi.enabled` is true, then install all the CRDs under the API group `consul.hashicorp.com`.

<Note>

>  Make backups of all the manifests after the Consul upgrade or copy the manifests from PVC before proceeding to the OCP upgrade.

Reviewer: Is this step misplaced?
